Big data bowl

Bucket the plays into 3 groups for quick, normal, long pockets based on <2, 2-2.5, >2.5 seconds
Quality of pocket
Bounding box
QB independent
Based on practical max area from dataset
Perpendicular win rate
Hypothetical QB at 8 yards deep. Straight lines to blockers. Perpendicular line from there
If blocker gets past, apply a raw negative area value based on the max pocket.
Network analysis
Something where you have the QB included.
Nodes being all blockers/rushers/QB, edges being distance divided by the difference in velocity?
Get a sense of the relative importance of different positions
Something that sums up the highest number of all the edge weights
Ideas
QUALITY OF POCKET
Bounding box idea: area of pocket by the box of the ol get cut off when defense gets inside and area decreases
Network analysis: make a graph of the QB, ol and dl with weights being the distances, direction, and speed to evaluate quality of pocket
Get a sense of how quality of pocket affects things both ways. How does quality of pocket affect play outcome, and how do different factors affect quality of pocket
Can touch on player/team metrics over expected, but most of it will be based on the new quality of pocket and it's effects.
Filter out screen passes, trap PA, and other fringe cases that would affect the quality of pocket outcome. Consider clustering ahead of time to group by oline movement and prefilter based on cluster. Also could just run it and look retroactively to see which were massive outliers in terms of quality of pocket And remove them then.
Include anyone within a certain distance of the QB to include chip and te pass pro, but drop off after a certain point
Look into how to increase sample size like the talks and Kevin Cole's wr plus minus. Use all the data by a rolling range and test on the left out value
Setup
GitHub
Google drive, onedrive, Evernote
Discord/slack
Big picture goals (why should we care)
Winner gets $100,000
Winner gets to present at the scouting combine
Finalists get a foot in the door for nfl jobs
Completing the project and having it on the resume sets us apart and shows we can do data science.
Exploratory data analysis
Get comfortable with the data
Get used to the tracking data
There is a package for using the dots for nfl plays. Being able to use that to check ourselves will be useful
The workshop on Friday for the conference is working with the tracking data
Descriptive statistics
Basic exploration of the data: mean, median, mode.
What's the biggest values, smallest, etc.
Group by team, player, play type, overall, etc
Diagnostic statistics
Getting a sense of the relationship between variables
Correlation, linearity, r^2, residuals, ptest, etc
Once we get to this point we start being targeted in our questions.
What do we ultimately want to study?
What will have the most impact?
What should we model?
What natural questions come from the data?
Then we can start building predictive analytics to answer those questions.
Predictive analytics
Make a model that predicts something based on the data
Can be simple linear regression models (something over/under expected)
Can be more complex neural network models (probably worth learning for this project given the number of moving parts)
There isn't any technique that someone else can use that is totally new/unusual. No one is going to be able to do something we can't.
Types of models include classification (what type of play is it), prediction (outcome of the play), clustering (collection of players/teams/schemes that are similar), others I'm sure
There is also a strong likelihood that we have to go back to descriptive + diagnostic analysis once we do a predictive model. For example, if we do a classification model first for determining the play call, we may want to go back and see what the average stats are for that playcall and what variables affect it most.
Prescriptive analytics
Being able to say something based on the results of the data
Being able to point to some metric for a position that correlates with success, showing that a certain playcall is very valuable, best play calls to beat certain situations, best players for different play calls, etc.
This is where we make some pretty data viz and do a wicked PowerPoint presentation.
Don't talk about failed or unused methodologies. This group may be more willing to talk about what you did, so be prepared to talk more in depth, but generally keep it brief until you get to prescriptive.
There is a data guy on Twitter Nick Wan who has a discord and has mentioned he would be willing to go over big data bowl work to help out.
https://discord.com/invite/maGKReXy
